bye
yes um lords i appear on behalf of the appellant who i refer to simply as
the appellant who i refer to simply as
a along with mr vasil adams malone of
friends mr jonathan crowe
mr jason koppel appear for the
respondent
and malone of friends lord panic and mr
hickman
appear on behalf of justice as an
intervener in this appeal
lord this is an appeal against the
decision of the court of appeal of the
18th of february of this year
that the administrative court has no
jurisdiction
to hear proceedings brought by a against
the respondent pursuant to
section 71a of the human rights act
a is a former member of the security
service
and r is the director of establishments
of the security service
a has brought judicial review
proceedings challenging ours the
respondent's refusal to authorize
publication of a book
he's written about his time in the
service which he strongly believes
should be published in the public
interest
without the authority uh from the
respondents
um a's obligation of confidential
confidentiality
fights and he cannot publish
laws the jurisdiction issue arises
because
uh in addition to challenging on
traditional public law grounds
of irrationality and bias a
raised the claim that the respondents
refusal of permission
was unlawful in the sense identified in
section six
of the human rights act 1998 i.e that
the respondent as a public authority in
refusing
authority to publish had acted in a way
incompatible with a's convention right
to freedom of expression
under article 10 of the european
convention
and it's worth probably just taking in
immediately the two main provisions in
issue in this case
first of all in the human rights act uh
in a core volume
in appendix part one in the core volume
page one
four five is section seven of the human
rights act
[Applause]
i i apologize i didn't respond with my
seat
thank you we're looking at the call
harlem page one four five
please um ahead of proceeding
section seven uh
a person who claimed for the public or
authority has acted or proposes to act
in a way which is made unlawful by
section
6-1 may bring proceedings against the
authority under this act
in the appropriate court or tribunal
which is the phrase at the heart of this
appeal
and it goes on or b
rely on the convention right or rights
concerned in any legal proceedings
but only if he is or would be a victim
of the unlawful act
and then two in subsection one a
appropriate court or tribunal means such
court or tribunal as may be determined
in accordance with rules
and proceedings against an authority
include a counter claim
or similar proceeding
the respondent disputed the jurisdiction
of the high court
to hear the section 71a proceedings
uh relying on section 65
2a and subsection 3a
of the regulator of the regulation of
investigatory powers act
000 which is a little further on
uh in the same volume of page 260.
just out of interest why why is it so
clear that the
claim is on the 71a rather than a claim
which involves reliance on the
convention right
71b uh because it's uh
the convention is being used as a sword
rather than the shield here the point is
not being raised
as it were in in defense in proceedings
brought against the
uh appellant b is simply using it
defensively not
incidentally yes um
although the case does raise the
interesting issue of um
situations circumstances where
the convention point is raised against
the intelligence services not as here
under a but under b
which is not a situation covered by the
provision we're about to look at
section 65 of reaper so the effect is
you could do that in a in a court and
you wouldn't be constrained to
go to the tribunal to do that how would
that work
that's assuming that somebody brings a
claim against you that some infraction
is suggested
that we write some other proceedings as
a defense
or in the or perhaps most obviously in
in the crown court you might take
if there were some criminal proceedings
resulting from the activities of the
intelligence services you might take the
point
the convention point in your defense at
the crown court
i suppose if injunction proceedings were
brought against you and you said um
exactly the same no public interest um
i'm all
um i should be entitled yes
it would be part of your argument for
resisting the the injunction application
but you wouldn't be doing it under
section 71a and subsection 2 doesn't
extend to the situation in one b
subsection two doesn't extend to one b
it's only telling you what the court
tribunal is for no it's it's so then
therefore this is one of what we're
calling the anomalies and i think what
lord justice ricks called the anomalies
in the respondents case that there are
other situations there are other
circumstances in which in a court you
could end up arguing to prevent your
convention point whether it's under
article 3 or article 8 or article 10
against the intelligence services
without being caught by section 65
2a because you you could have brought
precisely the same claim before the
human rights act
uh simply relying upon article 10 by way
of argument
uh in support of a claim of
irrationality exactly
um and so it's a little you don't have
to rely on section six one per c
you're you're not making a claim for
damages
um
yes i mean and and uh
the traditional argument in
irrationality would have been exactly
that but the court should assume that
the decision of the security services
would ris
would would respect article 10
principles and that what would what was
relied on in support of the decision was
proper justification under article 10 2
and anything other than that would be
irrational
well does it follow that the case
against you would would still be being
run
if there wasn't a section 6-1 at all um
if if there hadn't been even been a
human rights act
yes i mean that
there hadn't been a human rights act but
then you wouldn't say
um it was a seven
one a claim would you
no because it's it's expressly refers to
section six one
yes sorry i'm i'm not
following the point yes i wondered
whether that
was right i mean it's been assumed that
um
additional uh or ancillary claims um
for pure irrationality not relying on
the human rights act
would um be claims which would have to
be dealt with in the administrative
court's discretion
and they'd be stayed perhaps but that is
pointed out other courts don't have a
discretion the county called um for
example
um but i just wondered whether that was
right it doesn't seem to be a point
which anyone has addressed but um
and it may be jumping ahead a little but
if you look at section 65
2 b
the jurisdiction of the tribunal should
be to consider and determine any
complaints made to them
in accordance which in accordance with
subsection four a complaint switch the
tribunal is the appropriate
forum and then if you look at four
it's the appropriate forum for any
complaint if it's a complaint by a
person who's agreed by
any conduct falling within subsection
five which he believes to have taken
place in relation to him
well it would be such a conduct there's
all subsection five
um subsection five covers almost
anything 5a is conduct um
on behalf of intelligence services so
why wouldn't actually
um if appropriate forum um
means um only appropriate forum
um if it embraces some um
courts and tribunals and why um i
wouldn't
be um sweep up all the other claims why
is it a matter of discretion at all for
the administrative court
um well the position the position we've
reached in the administrative court is
that in the
in the court of appeal is that law
justice laws said well look you could
um in relation to the remaining claim
you could formulate though
certainly formulate those as complaints
and
that would absolve uh the admin court of
having to decide whether it should
hear those those cases yes but my point
is not a question
what is that could do my point is uh
what the statute means
what distinguishes the human rights act
claim from a claimed formulation i mean
i think the viewer has taken a complaint
to something rather different
yes from an application for judicial
review
yes we haven't incidentally got section
11 on which i think justice also
bought which justice also referred we
haven't got that in the court
bundle have we haven't got that in the
dependence uh
i don't think so but we obviously got it
somewhere
yeah is there a definition of complaint
um there is there is a definition of
complaint it's a series of statutory
hurdles you have to go through
working from um uh
subsection b uh through subsection
four yes and following the statutory
clue
to the rest of the section to five but i
mean i asked
i mean is there a definition of the
actual word i had a feeling that was
somewhere but i
i'm maybe wrong
i mean why shouldn't it embrace judicial
review
uh well i think the answer is simply
because it's a statutory form of
grievance
the constituent elements of which are
defined by the sections
you have to pick your way through in the
statute there's nothing to exclude you
just review
unless judicial review is outside the
word complaint
on the face of it um i might well not be
yes could you you would well it's a sub
section five it seems to be tied
very much to the subject matter of the
statute yes
um it doesn't seem to go beyond the idea
i mean i'm speaking very generally the
idea of surveillance and and
um uh entry and interference with
property and so on which is all
stuff done in order to carry out the
kind of investigations
yes under parts one to three of the act
so it may be
the subject matter is the point that
distinguishes this complaint which is
bought and brought with reference to
things done
apparently or purportedly under the
statute yeah which would be said we're
not we're out with the powers of the
statute whereas
uh the judicial review of other matters
wouldn't be within the list
yes i mean that's your third line of
argument which may
um on one view be and
an interesting line of argument yes you
say basically i mean i think you just
extend that to all
uh parts of sub-section 65 too wouldn't
you
yes he would say that this statute is
dealing with a different subject matter
from
the one we're concerned with yes and it
has to be 65 has to be read in the
context of the act as a whole
and the legislative history and that
suggests it really is about
use of investigatory powers rather than
stopping somebody publishing a book
the argument's been very short on that
even in the cases
yes
well can i come up to that in due course
65 um
uh 2a and 3a are the provisions that
have been focused on
closely thus far in the proceedings
um 2a the jurisdiction of the tribunal
shall be to be the only appropriate
tribunal
for the purposes of subsection of
section 7 of the hra
in relation to any proceedings under
subsection 1a of that section
proceedings for actions incompatible
with prevention rights which fall within
which fall within subsection three of
this section
so the types of proceedings if you like
the categories of proceedings
under sub under section 71a are defined
in subsection three
a b c c a c b and c d
and this case has proceeded on the
correct understanding that
we're caught by 3a proceedings against
any of the intelligence services
but there is a lot more in subsection
three
perhaps than has hitherto being
appreciated and one of the points that
we'll make is that
one looks closely at 3c and 3d
it's clear that they catch within
section 65
2a a whole range of proceedings which
might be formulated as section 71a
proceedings
uh of a much more mundane nature than
uh proceedings against the intelligence
services
they may catch complaints about
directed surveillance by the police for
example
and they may catch complaints about
a failure of the safeguarding
arrangements for encrypted information
which is dealt with in part three of the
act which again
doesn't necessarily have to have
anything to do with the intelligence
services
but uh to get through the statutory
provisions that are relevant to those
arguments is a bit of a
is a bit of a minefield so i'm going to
leave that at the moment and come back
to it but but one does have to work
one's way through exactly what c and d
in particular mean in subsection three
lords in the courts below the
jurisdiction challenge was determined as
a preliminary issue
and the judgment of mr justice collins
at first instance
is is worth considering initially
because
he was seized not only of the question
the jurisdictional preliminary issue but
also the question of whether
jurisdiction should be accepted
on the footing that uh there were the
parallel jurisdictions
uh it's a page 18 in appendix
uh part one
uh miss justice collins held that the
admin court did have jurisdiction to
hear the section 71a
claim uh he held that uh
section 652a gave both the admin court
and the ipt
jurisdiction over a's human rights act
proceedings
and if i could just go in particular to
paragraph
14 on page 23
to get the knob of mr justice collins
reasoning
right at the bottom but the last four
lines but the words used in section 65
2a make sense if it is intended to
exclude the jurisdiction of any other
tribunal
which might have jurisdiction in
particular circumstances for example an
employment tribunal
but no reference is made to exclusion of
the court
and i can see no reason to imply it
and then at paragraph
18 i don't know if uh in the lordship's
bundles
25 and 26 are the wrong way round
uh my goes from 16 to 31
so we're looking at page 26
paragraph 18
mr justin's collins says no doubt it
might have been helpful and perhaps
desirable
to have referred the house this is in
the shaler case to
reaper and the existence and
jurisdiction of the ipt
nevertheless uh their opinions that's
the opinions of
the law lords in the shayla case
provide a powerful indication that in
such a cases this judicial review
is the appropriate remedy
and then at 26 paragraphs 26 and 27
he draws together his reasoning in this
way
says i have no doubt that claims
raising matters in relation to
surveillance
interception of communications and use
of material
obtained thereby the use of covert
services
the acquisition of means whereby
protected electronic data can be
decrypted
so those are the activities covered by
parts one to three of reaper
should be dealt with by the tribunal it
is difficult to envisage circumstances
in which such claims
would properly be dealt with by the
court since
parliament is clearly intended tribunal
should deal with them
nothing i have said should encourage
anyone who is concerned that his rights
been infringed
by any such matters to seek address
through the court
rather than the tribunal any such
attempts are likely to fail but the
circumstances of this case
are somewhat different and although the
tribunal undoubtedly has jurisdiction
its procedures are less satisfactory and
the issues are wider than those for
which reaper
specifically required it to be
established isn't that inconsistent the
reasoning with the
earlier paragraph i i mean the earlier
paragraph says that parliament hasn't um
intended to exclude the jurisdiction of
the court this paragraph seems to
proceed on the basis that it's clear
that the tribunal was to deal with it
well i think what's being said is that
the admin court would inevitably decline
jurisdiction in favor of the ipt well so
it's an exercise of a discretion is it
over
well one of the things that would have
to be looked at very closely is whether
on the facts of the case
the more restrictive
trial procedures in the ipt
can be justified whether the issues that
the case raises
are such that that restricted form of
procedure is required
or whether it's a case that is a sort of
forum convenience
argument or what is it uh it's a rather
more complicated one that
we get i think we're going to go through
quite a lot of the arguments in due
course but whether it can be properly
tried
in the high court free of the
restrictions
procedural restrictions that apply in
the tribunal and also
as the lord says whether looking at the
substance of the claim
whether it falls within that area of
regulation of investigatory powers under
parts one to three of repo
um which the ipt is a for which the ipt
is a specialist tribunal
which what about i mean it is it does
seem to be
quite a difficulty that you face that
um parliament has contemplated this
discretion which only applies in the
administrative court wouldn't apply if
there were county court proceedings
wouldn't apply if there were
other proceedings in another court and
has elaborate procedure for a tribunal
and
hasn't really addressed the position in
court at all
it does seem rather an improbable
interpretation of 65 2a
that's the argument against you it's the
argument against us except
that the category of cases caught by
subsection three
as i've said and we'll come on to this
is not just cases that require that
elaborate
procedure quite a lot of them have to
put it to put it bluntly fairly
straightforward privacy confidentiality
cases
so there is a there is a contradiction
in section 65 2a and subsection
3. um if the argument against us rests
entirely on the suggestion
that um the the ipt
procedures are bespoke procedures and
specially crafted
to meet claims falling under these two
subsections
because they simply don't seem to be
necessary in very many of the cases
um
on your construction does the conduct
complain whichever jurisdiction is being
exercised have to be conduct falling
within subsection five
for four for a section 65
1a set of proceedings
um to be caught by section 65 1a and
3. simply 65 2a do you mean
they simply have to be proceedings that
fall within one of the five
categories in subsection three but they
can they be complaining about contacts
other than the conduct within subsection
five
um
on your analysis on on our
on our third meeting what's put as our
third meaning uh
no the the conduct has to be the sort of
conduct that's covered
uh by the act and that you can challenge
under the other
courses of action in front of you better
on your other readings
on the other readings no no it doesn't
which is why
why we're in this situation this is an
article 10 claim about publication
on the other on the other readings
without that limitation
to these two subsections we're caught
simply because it's a claim against the
intelligence services and it is framed
as a section 71a
case it's nothing to do with conduct in
any of the subsection five senses it's
just refusal of authorization to publish
a book
why isn't that under 3b subsection 3b
unlike 3 d which does refer to
subsection 5
3b doesn't
on the face of it the language is um all
embracing
in relation to this this case well just
generally
in relation to the intelligence services
it is yes
but c and d do not cover just the
intelligence services they cover all
kinds of other activities of
uh public officials um
but there's there's no dispute that we
that we
on the face of the act we are covered by
a these are proceedings against the
intelligence services
um b i suppose would be if your
complaint is that
the intelligence services get a third
party to
spy on you and get get your milkman to
come into your house and
gather information and give it to them
that would be conduct on behalf of the
intelligence services but wouldn't be
the conduct of the intelligence services
and if you brought the claim against
the milkman that would be covered by b
by the third party
um but the issue the issue is not so
much
whether on its face this claim this
assertion under article 10 to be able to
be able to publish the book
is caught by a or b
read in conjunction with 652a it is
the issues a 3b case because it's
against the director of establishments
um
well i suppose
the the argument the argument is the
argument for it being under a
see the judgment of lord justice laws in
the court of appeal is that the
functions
of the security service as a statutory
entity
or or as an organization regulated by
statute to very wide
could embrace a decision not to allow a
person in my client's position to
publish a book
and therefore the claim falls against
the security service which is just
simply a claim against the security and
they aren't the respondent
they aren't the respondents no probably
doesn't matter but i mean i can't see
why doesn't that
be well one of the issues that we raised
unsuccessfully in the court of appeals
whether any claim of this sort is in
reality against the the crown
um and we pointed out we lost on that
but we did point out that there were
many other people
in the position of a subject to a duty
of confidence ex
special forces uh soldiers for example
the point i'm reading
no no i mean it's it's very difficult to
know
um whether because the response i mean
it hasn't been it hasn't been of
importance thus far because we've
accepted we're caught by three whether
it's under a or b
but i suppose you could say the director
of establishments
having been sued as an individual
decision taker is a person
and he's taking it on behalf of doesn't
this raise kind of fundamental questions
as to
who is a legal person who can sue or be
sued
into contracts or the rest of it
intelligence services
but they're defined on page 281 yes
they have a they are um
they exist under statutory control and
they have specified functions
um uh and the view was taken
uh by law justice laws therefore that
these weren't proceedings of brains the
crown they were directed
uh towards the security services as an
organization
so the defendant should really be the
security service
on that analysis yes no nobody's
starting to mention
something and even all of costs are made
is the security service an
entity which has got funds that can pay
costs or
have you got to look at some other
government body which is a
legal person well it's not a stat it's
not a statutory corporation and it
exists under the
aegis of of the crown and the minister
but it has
this statutory regulation which we're
going to
whether it's illegal
person or not yes anyway yeah it's a bit
of a red herring
yeah perhaps my own person my personal
preference in retrospect having argued
the point in the court of appeal would
have been to have gone against the crown
but
um well maybe wrong view of the way it's
been the proceedings have been brought
uh like lord brown i can't understand
why this isn't a
paragraph b case yes because there you
are you've got a person
and the complaint or the proceedings are
in respect to this conduct
in this particular position um on behalf
of
the intelligence services seems to fall
quite neatly within b is there any
particular reason why you're struggling
to avoid b
no there's no there's no particular
reason um we're in the same position
whether it's a or b
it's just that although literally that
that does seem to be correct i've
looked at b more in terms of um
uh the uh intelligence gathering and the
investigatory activities of the service
and therefore the milkman who's asked to
come into your living room is
is a more obvious person rather than
somebody who's within the organization
indeed a senior figure in the
organization who presumably takes
decisions while the organization
you might say then it on the face of it
it's b but for the reasons you
just hinted at it isn't yeah because
it's outside the scope of the
section all together yes i think that is
what b
is driving i mean our feeling is that's
is driving at not administrative
decisions
as part of not by senior senior
officials
part of the functions of the service but
inducing some third party young
connected with the service
to intrude upon your article 8 rights or
your article 10 rights or your article 3
rights
perhaps getting a net getting getting
another an agent of another organization
to do the investigating perhaps
something like that
um the lords we were looking at
mr justin's justice collins decision uh
you'll see it paid 40 in the bundle
in the core volume but um
as i've said he had it in part one a
bigger problem
when he handed down his judgment on the
4th of july
he looked at this issue of whether the
admin court should decline
jurisdiction in favor of the
jurisdiction that he accepted existed in
the ipt
and he gave an extemporary judgment
which is really um
covered by paragraph 79 to 83 on that
page
and uh the sort of factors uh
to come to um
um the lord lord clarke's point um that
he directed his mind to in considering
that in this case
um was
[Music]
at 80 he thought
claimed himself this is a point we take
as an ex-member of the security service
perhaps might not be precluded from
seeing or receiving information
which would not be made public in the
normal case for example where a member
of the public
was challenging in the ipt the use of
the investigatory powers of the
intelligence services at 81 more
importantly this court has to give a
reasoned
judgment or possibly judgment if it's
necessary there should be some matters
that should be dealt with in closed
judgment
and there is and there is a right of
appeal
to the court of appeal in relation to
any errors there is no right to appeal
from the tribunal it sits in private
and is precluded from giving reasons if
it fights against the claimant
um then he uh came back to the decision
of the house of lords in
shayla suggesting that judicial review
was the appropriate
forum to deal with issues of the sort
that arise in this case
and he said at 83 on balance i'm
persuaded that it is right this case
should continue in the admin court
although it is not impossible there will
be a need for cross-examination of
witnesses
the court has to approach this on the
basis of a detailed review this being an
alleged breach of the human right
the scope of judicial review is somewhat
wider than perhaps as routine in other
cases
both decisions were appealed to the
court of appeal that is the decision
of jurisdiction and the decision to
accept jurisdiction
and the decision of the court of appeal
is page 57
by a majority consisting of law justice
laws and law justice
dyson or justice rick's dissenting
uh the court of appeal allowed the
respondents appeal in relation to
jurisdiction
holding that the admin court had no
jurisdiction to entertain the hra
section 71
a proceedings um
could i just take the lordship to one or
two passages to get the flavour of the
reasoning in the court of appeal
uh paragraph 18 in the judgment of lord
justice
laws at the bottom of page 66
for justice laws felt that the use in
section 65
qa of the term tribunal in contrast to
court or tribunal in 66
1 is in my view unsurprising and readily
explained
the reference in section 66 1 a
b is to a court or tribunal as it were
as the case may
be by contrast section 65 2
this is the important point is enacted
only in the context of the jurisdiction
of the ipt
already assigned by that subsection and
the ipt is of course
a tribunal and not a chord
then at paragraph 22
[Applause]
uh he dealt with the concern that um
the director's case
might be in effect ousting the
jurisdiction of the high court to hear
this human rights act case and says
it's elementary that any attempt to oust
all together the high court
supervisory jurisdiction over public
authorities
is repugnant to the constitution but
statutory measures which confide the
jurisdiction of a judicial body of light
standing in authority
to that of the high court which operates
subject to special procedures
apt for the subject matter in hand may
well be constitutionally inoffensive
the ipt whose membership i have
described offers with respect
no cause for concern on this score and
as i have noted the rules have been held
by the ipt
to be convention compliant save
paragraph
96 which is the obligation in all cases
to help
private hearings which is accordingly
falling not fallen away
and i apologize he had drawn attention
to the fact that
um the uh composition of the
uh ipt includes amongst others lord
justice mummery
and mr justice burton
and other distinguished members um
uh at 23 uh he dealt with the
uh case of shayla in which the
house of lords suggested judicial review
was the appropriate
route for a case such as this and um
right at the end of 23 dealt with it in
this way
but no argument was addressed to their
lordships as to the possibility of any
recourse to the ipt
as opposed to judicial review at the
hands of a person refused permission to
publish with great respect i do not
consider in those circumstances
that we obtain any definitive guidance
from shayla
then lord justice rick's uh dissenting
on whose observations we obviously rely
uh at paragraph 33
right at the end um
he noted that section 65 2a
had content as referring to the ipt as
the only appropriate
tribunal that phrase is intended to be
an exclusion of the courts
then the exclusion is implicit rather
than express
38 it is said
the language of exclusiveness is not
required
this is the argument for the director
since what was happening as of the 2nd
of october 2000 was an allocation of a
new
hra jurisdiction rather than of any
reallocation of an existing jurisdiction
however
i do not find the point very comforting
the fact is that cpr 711
allocates section 7 proceedings in
general to the courts
and if an exception is to be carved out
of that even by
primary legislation such as a reaper one
is entitled to think that such an
exception
would be achieved plainly and expressly
and not uncertainty
uncertainly and by means of implication
and then uh we respectfully would agree
with that at 39
um about uh eight or nine lines down
the only apprec the only proceedings
against the intelligence services which
are allocated under section 65
are section 7 proceedings all other
proceedings are not yet allocated
c section 65 2d and that's correct and
i'll come on to that in a moment
if they were to be allocated provision
may or may not be for the ipt to
exercise jurisdiction to the exclusion
of any other court or tribunal
this would be if other common law causes
of action against intelligence services
were allocated
it would be understandable the
proceedings or complaints
which concerned subject matter of
particularly sensitive nature such as
surveillance
interception of communications use of
covert services and such like
should be assigned exclusively to the
ipt with its special rules and removed
entirely from all courts or other
tribunals
that however is not the functional
approach taken in section 65.
if one asked what is so special about
section 7 proceedings against the
intelligence services
as to require them of all proceedings
to be assigned solely to the ipt to the
exclusion
not only of any other tribunals such as
the employment tribunal but of the
courts as well
there is no ready answer certainly none
has been suggested
in relation to employment could could we
just go back to
paragraph searches yes
the second half of that it is common
ground that there is another tribunal
before which but for section 65 2a
a claim etc
might have been brought well how could a
claim have been brought
before the employment tribunal unless
there was a rule of court that
permitted it yes which there isn't i'm
not
i'm not sure that i i agree with that i
mean we can see we can see the rule of
quarter in 34.
um a claim in respect to the judicial
atmosphere in the high court any other
claim under section seven one here that
may be brought in any court now does in
any court
con include tribunals no no no no it
doesn't
no no i think the i think i think the
employment tribunal
hair which ran through the courthouse
feeling maybe a bit of a if i mix my
metaphor maybe a bit of a red herring or
a red hair
therefore it's not one that we're
chasing anymore no i mean actually there
is paris and there are under seven
nine to appoint tribunals and indeed a
tribunal certainly in the shape of uh
two i think the prescribed
organization's appeal commission yeah
they're after psych
have been um
prescribed and are therefore but it's a
mistake as to the employment right you
know they haven't actually
exactly there were never rules made
under seven nines saying
a claimant in an employment tribunal can
run a section
so actually i mean it is a it's a
mistake and it's a mistake in various
passages
uh lord lord justice laws is wrong a
paragraph
twenty and lord justice tyson is
wrong um a little later on where he met
him
went to i think in 42 yeah but it's a
mistake at least which
both both sides are quite quite both
judicial and
and the advocates everybody made it but
it's not correct
it was never your strongest argument
anyway i'm so sorry it wasn't your
strongest argument anyway no no
no no no um uh the
the exercise of trying to identify
another tribunal
as at the second of october that got
jurisdiction under section 79
um is not it's not a profitable one we
just can't we can't find one
um so the effect of section 65 2a is
general and declaratory it's not
targeted at any other specific tribunals
that had jurisdiction
at that point um
uh in the um
a paragraph 40 of the judgment of lord
justice
rix he also comforted himself
as he put it in the middle of the
paragraph with the fact that their
lordships in
shayla even though the reaper point was
not an issue saw no particular
difficulty in suggesting judicial review
as a suitable means by which a former
member of the
uh security intelligence services could
challenge a refusal to publish
and he makes the point nor was that a
matter of passing comment it was the
ground upon which
their lordships demonstrated the author
had a remedy in the cause
whereby you seek a ruling by way of just
review the influence with the right to
freedom expression was greater
and could be justified on the grounds of
national security and again we
agree with that it was the um it was the
entire thrust of the shayla case that
um it was a suitable forum
uh the high court in judicial review to
look at the sort of article 10 issues
that are raised
i mean are you asking us to say that
sheila would have been differently
decided if
if their lordships of that era had
thought that it would have to be
doctored by the ipt rather than by the
administrative court i don't i don't i
don't know what the answer to that is i
don't know
um they would have been in effect have
been looking at the issues some of the
issues
that your lordships are going to be
looking at in this case
um and i wouldn't presume to try and
track back and imagine what
what decision they would have reached
one would have hoped from our point of
view it would have been the one that
we're seeking in this case which is that
um or at any rate if they were if
they were saying exclusive jurisdictions
in the ipt that they would have been
troubled by the
uh the use of the rather restricted
fair trial the trial procedures in the
ipt to try a case of this sort
can i just get straight i mean would
that have arisen in shayla because
shayla was about events in the 1990s
would um
um the matter of um could the matter
have gone
to the ipt shayla made his disclosures
in 97.
so shayla had done what he should have
done rather than just making the
disclosures
to the media and done what my client has
done
which is to seek authorization from the
service
and that had been refused and therefore
he'd been in the position of my client
he would have been in that position in
97 or 98.
which case he could have run a
conventional judicial review but surely
the issue in shaler was whether he did
or didn't as at the date the house of
lords were seized of it have a public
interest defense wasn't that the
question
oh yes it was under under the official
secrets act it came from the proprietary
hearing in the crown court
you know i think i i was in the case my
recollection
may be imperfect but i think what we
were trying to do was to see
giving the given the law as it was at
the time when the hearing was taking
place
how the um how the situation might be
viewed in strasbourg and therefore
mind the judicial review is regarded as
a little suspicion we were trying to
expand
a bit to explain why we thought it was
suitable yes it would have been a much
tougher
task i suspect if we'd had to explain
that the
ipt was a suitable vehicle for this yeah
it didn't occur to anybody as we can see
to
face up to that challenge no no it
wasn't argued that although in 2002 when
the case was before the house of lords
obviously it was an argument that could
have been raised on the law as it was at
that time exactly the same argument
could have been raised then but
uh it wasn't raised on behalf of the
state and sheila it was
some accepted that if there was to be an
article
10 challenge it would be a judicial
review i d i do apologize i was trying
to
give a literal answer to the lord lord
mance's question on the basis of the
chronology of events in shayla sheila
would simply have never been in the
position of a
because the human rights act wasn't in
force when he might have been seeking
authority yeah but he didn't can i just
raise
another point on um lord justice rix's
judgment
paragraph 38 where he treats some
cpr 7.11 as a sort of primary rule
and says that if an exception was to be
carved out even by primary legislation
one would think that would be done
plainly and
expressly and does that actually work on
the facts because the um
regulatory inves
went through parliament and it received
the role of sent on the 28th of july
so it was a given law by then the civil
procedure amendment rules which
introduced
7.11 were
only made on the 22nd of july they
weren't laid before parliament till the
2nd of august
and so i mean it seems most improbable
that they were regarded as a given
by the legislature at the time that
reaper was going through
parliament i don't suppose um um that
they were mentioned but um
they certainly weren't in force they
were yes
one can see that point but but but
equally the net effect of the
of the respondents argument is that the
supervisory jurisdiction of the high
court
is barred by section 65 2a
and uh in terms of construction of
section 65
2a we would say normal principles apply
that is adverse to
to my client in this case because he's
denied
a flexible um procedure for the trial of
his
his case for all the reasons we're going
to come on to onto
and therefore the court should be very
slow to read section 65 to
a in a way which bars his access to the
supervisory jurisdiction of the high
court which he feels is more favorable
to him procedurally um and one of our
points is you just don't really get you
really just don't get out of the working
of 65
2a anything that's a clear statement by
parliament that a man in my client's
position
should be denied the opportunity
of invoking the supervisory jurisdiction
of the high court
lords to move on then to
uh lord justice dyson uh and therefore
complete
the the thinking in the court of appeal
um again hopefully trying to take it
shortly you'll see a paragraph 46 over
the page
um that he inclined to the view
following on from the point the lord
lord mantis just raised with me that the
um his view was creation of convention
rights
in agreement with law justice laws and
the assignment of the rights to
pursue them were all part of the same
legislative scheme
by virtue of the fact that all the
different provisions all came into force
on the 2nd of october 2000.
courts did not previous to that date had
the jurisdiction to determine
proceedings under the hra
no question about stick and therefore
this comes back to the point i
raised the answer about whether this is
really is a
71a claim if you look at if you look at
the
claim itself it's no reference to human
rights act
at all it doesn't purport to be a claim
being brought under the act
it's a judicial review claim but an
irrational decision
which relies upon human rights just as
it could have done before the act
came into force yes and whereas before
the act came into force
and these provisions came into force
there would have been a right to
judicial review
in the administrative court yes on this
reading
that right has been ousted
it's exactly the same claim that could
have been brought before
not per se a claim that can only be
brought because of section six one
there's no reference to section six one
anyway yes
the case has been argued thus far on the
basis of section seven one eight
at okay the judicial review application
page 13 uh in the appendix part one
um
[Applause]
yes it is true it was the the um section
71b
i'm reminded was taken at first instance
in front of mr justice collins
unsuccessfully and not pursued to the
court of appeal
um i don't think it i mean the the the
argument wasn't put
in exactly that way i don't think that
that
article 10 could have been invoked in
any event in the judicial review
proceedings
onto the on a traditional judicial
review before the human rights
i don't think it was put in that way um
but i mean it does rather it does take
the question
but to say there's no ouster on that
basis simply doesn't
seem to need to be correct precisely the
same claim is being ousted
but this is right absolutely absolutely
and the react this is why
when i was answering lord lord mance a
moment ago i
i didn't say in terms but i was hinting
it may be a bit of a distraction to
start thinking in terms of ouster or not
outside
the important point is that the
substance of his complaint
my client's complaint is always the same
whether before after the second of
october the substance of the claim is
the state
hasn't got sufficient justification
under article 10 2 to justify the denial
of authority
and what is being taken away from him
on the director's case is an argument
that he could
always have run in the admin court and
um
intuitively one would think of running
in the african court rather than the ipt
so i mean there are so two aspects to
the asteroid
one is that it's an ouster of the
courts section seven one jurisdiction
expressly confer
by um order 711 or whatever it is
by the rules made under the second cpr
7-eleven
that's one aspect but the other which is
a slightly different one which i think
is my
my my my law representative
is that it's an ouster not of a section
seven one
right to go to the court but an asteroid
of a pre-existing
common law right yes and we we
better make sure which one we're talking
about any given point because they're
very different arguments they're very
different arguments and and that's why
i've been tr i've been trying to talk
about
the end result which he had barred from
the supervisory jurisdiction of the high
court over and out of the executive
in an area where he wants to invoke a
fundamental but i mean highly pertinent
to the second of those arguments
is section 11 of the human rights act
which
as i said justice refers to paragraph 61
nobody else i think refers to and isn't
actually in our offense
perhaps we also look
you probably don't we will but we'll do
it set out as i say
injustice
paragraph 61
um
uh yes but it's yes but i mean to come
back to come back to the lord lord
phillips's point it is
um i mean the the question of what is in
in what what is a section seven one a
claim is a tricky one um
i mean just because in substance when
you're
bringing a claim you raise a convention
point
um does that make it a section seven one
a
set of proceedings or is there some
um even without the um
bringing home a section 10.
here i mean article 10. i'm terrible
well it's
as i understand it it's easier as i've
understood the act it's easier
for the admin court after the human
rights act as lord
as mr justice collins says to look at
uh to look at to look at the facts
and to balance the facts and
in effect think through the
article article ten two stages on the
evidence before it
rather than standing back and saying
well all we're really doing is
scrutinizing or supervising a decision
of the executive it's rather more
interventionist
and active because of the need to avoid
the risk of a human rights breach
but whether in substance there was any
different to the way the court would
have done it before
october 2001 one doubts in a case of
this sort
uh i mean it's often one often loses
sight of the fact and one tends to do in
this case
that common law you're free to put
you're free to publish whatever you can
unless the state prevents you unless
there's a law that prevents you
you can publish a book i mean in common
law terms
is there not a constitutional right to
publish a book unless there's a valid
legal reason for stopping you
is your position the same under the
terms of the contract
in relation to in relation to
publication
um uh under article 10 it is absolutely
yes
the issue is a higher one than that as
it were the end result of
the the the contractual arrangement
and the possibility of waving it and
granting authority
is that we are in a situation where the
state has an estate
in the form of the respondent has
control as it were over our free
expression rights and can say yay or
nadi
and therefore it's a classic
interference with the article 10 one
right to say nay would you say under the
contract
they will be bound to waive the rights
they would otherwise have
if it will be disproportionate to
exercise them
having regard to article 10 for example
yes i mean
the the existence of the contract means
that the measure adopted against
aids free speech rights is prescribed by
law to look at the second stage in
article 10 to
we would accept that there is an
accepted and foreseeable and predicted
legal framework for client for
for individuals such as my client which
requires them to get
the authority of the intelligence
services
to to cut a hole in the obligation of
confidence to allow
the information in that book to be
published um
but that's just the framework in which
the state takes the decision
that's the prescribed by law framework
the real
question is as is often the case in
article 10 cases
um is the decision it having been taken
in that way
no you can't publish the book necessary
and proportionate
on the facts looking at what's in the
book and and what possible justification
there is for that
i'll take some trading that actually
your case would have been equally strong
before the human rights act yes well i
said it wasn't
i wasn't setting out to try and persuade
the lord of that um
there would have been anxious scrutiny
no doubt before the human rights act
and the uh importance of the convention
wouldn't have been over
overlooked but the uh the
the value of the human rights act is
um that the court um can't itself act
unlawfully it can't act incompatibly
with the convention rights
but the obvious example of the 71a clay
would be a claim for invasion of private
life
which there wouldn't have been a cause
of action for that
prior to the human rights act no and
that
brings us straight into the relevant
context
yeah that's what people normally are
going to be
objecting to is intrusive surveillance
yes and so the human rights act has
given rise to a course of action in
relation to that which wasn't there
before
yes um
that's undoubtedly true because because
in that situation you are able to say
the the state or public authority has
interfered with
with my privacy right after the 2nd of
october which you couldn't say before
um there was no claim if you like of
that sort an equivalent claim of that
and sort on
section 7 1a or anywhere else in our law
and it's true that most of the complaint
the substance of most of the complaints
about investigatory powers will be about
invasion of privacy i mean 99.9
of them if framed as human rights act
claims will be about
the use of the investigatory powers in a
way that interferes with somebody's
privacy as defined under
article 8. um that's one of the unusual
features of this case one
of course that we say that that means we
should be heard in the court
it's a case about publishing a book
um i mean does that marry with your
third construction i mean are you
are you able to say that actually 65
1a only bites um in respect of
claims which couldn't have been brought
before reaper and are now being brought
in respect for surveillance and
inception powers um creating article 8
rights that
never existed before i mean is that is
that where you actually draw the line
if you ask yourself yes or no would
there have been
any claim available save under reaper is
i mean that's not an argument i have uh
located here too but
because what reaper does is it gives you
a collection in
in the other sections and subsections a
collection of statutory complaints
and proceedings that you can bring
arising out of the abuse of
investigatory
powers all entirely new in statutory
terms i accept under the preceding
uh acts regulating the security services
and the civil intelligence service there
was
there were forms of complaint you could
make to the pre-existing tribunals
but these are new and much more
comprehensive
um and the argument therefore is that
uh it makes a imminent sense it makes
obvious good sense
when you're looking at the thrust of the
act and the form of new complaints given
to
people under the act about abuses of
investigatory powers
to draw to draw a circle around the sort
of section 71a claims that are going to
be forced into the tribunal
that's that's the third argument um but
i mean i can't pretend they're entirely
new because there were
complaints we're going to look at this
in a second no no of course i mean that
that obviously
but i'm sorry i don't think i put that
right but i mean
if it is only in respect of those
matters that are expressly dealt with in
reaper in other parts of reaper
which are the controls on surveillance
interception and the rest of it
i mean you if you can find it to that i
mean but then one asks well what's the
point of having a section
a human rights act claim on top i mean
you've already got your rights under the
act
yes well that's another bit of a bit of
a vex question as well if one looks at
the decisions of the ipt
you see people doubling up in substance
the same complaint and framing it as it
were in the alternative as a section
seven on a
claim when it's obvious that the
substantive complaint available to them
under the remaining provisions of the
act
is tackling the same mischief which is
the invasion of their privacy and the
fact there wasn't proper justification
for it
but one supposes it's there because
there may
the outer edges cases where you would
have to frame it as a section 71a claim
because you can't exactly get it within
the
the narrow confines of the other
statutory complaints that are available
to you
but it just seems um wrong in principle
to uh read section on the thought on our
third meaning to read section 7
section 65 2a as covering all sorts of
other
human rights act claims that might be
brought against the intelligence
services
for example not just under section
asserting article 10 rights but for
example asserting article 3 rights
i mean if you complained if you were
complaining that they've been privy to
torture obtaining an interview through
torture or something like that
uh i mean that's that's um
it's really not something that's dealt
with at all in
um this statutory regulatory regime
a much wider question and the question
why should you be forced into the ipt in
that sort of place
perhaps you'll come into this in a
moment but the the the heading of
part four of the act which we're
involved in at page 249
may give some guide as to what that
whole part is dealing with
scrutiny etc and the function of
investigative powers and of the
functions of the intelligent services so
you've got powers in one hand in the
functions
the way in which the functions are being
exercised yes
but of course it would be no part of the
function of this of the intelligence
services to be part privileged but
arguably departed to torture for example
i mean it's difficult to see
why that should fall within that heading
and be caught under part four
um but you come back with with that
heading you come back to the question of
what are
of the functions and how widely you
interpret the statutory functions of the
intelligence services
um which as i say we took a bit of a
bruising on in the court of appeal and
haven't reopened in this in the supreme
court
um
what the argument is what are the
functions uh functions of statutory
statutory set out on there yes but but
lord justice lord says incidental to
that are all kinds of other things that
any organization of this sort would
would do including taking decisions
about banning books
that would be part of the functions of
the of the agency
which we we didn't accept in the court
of appeal
um but the functions the functions are
it's fair to say the functions in the 94
act are specified in
fairly general and in fairly general
terms
uh at quite a high high degree of
abstraction it's not a very long act it
doesn't have a lot of
detailed provisions about what the
functions are um they're more as it were
objectives can be achieved
overriding objectives i mean functions
isn't the reason why
um your torture example would um fall
outside 665 2a is it
it would just fall outside it because it
wouldn't be a human rights act
claiming it would be a common law claim
wouldn't it
well it might be framed as a human
rights act claim yes it might be
my friend just damages claims if it were
framed as a common law claim
and then you get the question in a
rather highlighted way as to whether
that was a complaint
yes well and i take your point but it
isn't what you would ordinarily describe
as a complaint
it's not what you'd already described as
complaint then of course
your in-law justice rix's line of
thinking which is if you frame it as a
common law complaint against the
intelligence services you can bring it
in the courts what's so special about
framing it as a section 71a claim
um if if this is not a if this weren't a
section
subsection 2a set a claim
um but we'll say under little b
and that was a claim a complaint for
which the tribunal was the appropriate
forum
what does the appropriate forum mean
is that about jurisdiction
i mean is the statute saying that the
tribunal has
exclusive jurisdiction because it is the
appropriate form
in such a case for them in such case or
not
uh well that's that's certainly the way
we've read it up until now
but um forum is a word unlike
tribunal which is act to cover court
and tribunal and indeed i suppose any
other
public body any other public forum for
discussion in which you could challenge
it i mean
read literally the word forum goes even
further than a court or a tribunal
um so on your analysis that does exclude
the jurisdiction of the courts
on your analysis such a case would
exclude the jurisdiction of the courts
yes
distinction to the 2a claim where the
words
are only appropriate tribunal um
and we're going to explain in a moment
what is a matter of construction we say
that means
it exactly does it doesn't embrace court
or tribute i mean can i put an
alternative
problem um or a problem about that view
um the
if appropriate forum in b means
exclusive
then it looks to me pretty clear that c
is also exclusive it's because it's a
very special type of issue which could
only be brought
um before a tribunal which was given
authority to deal with it and that's the
authority under sea
when you come to d which is a sweet pub
the draftsman has felt it necessary to
provide in section 66
that the sweep up may or may not be
accompanied
by an exclusion of the jurisdiction of
any court or tribunal
and that's understandable in the case of
a sweep up you might not be clear that
you wanted to confer
exclusive jurisdiction but it does
rather suggest doesn't it that the first
three a b and c uh would all have been
regarded as aspects of exclusive
jurisdiction
no i must say we've rather read it the
other way which is that
um what uh i think it's
66 i beg your pardon what uh
what he is saying is look um
you could take let's just let's focus on
3a the claim against the intelligence
services you could take
the common law claims for example
against the intelligence services if
you're the secretary of state
and if and when this is in force make an
order
and say the ipt has jurisdiction over
those
claims um what section 1666
1a says is an order an order of that
sort giving jurisdiction over those
other forms of proceedings against the
intelligence services
may note the word may in subsection 1a
provide for the tribunal to exercise
jurisdiction in relation to that matter
to the exclusion of the jurisdiction of
court or any tribe doesn't have to
that's very odd because there's no power
to give the tribunal on your argument
exclusive jurisdiction over human rights
claims you could take the other common
law of claims
and you could say that these ought to go
to the tribunal
but you on your argument could never
take a section 65 2a claim
and give exclusive jurisdiction to the
tribunal
because d only deals with other such
proceedings
uh but on
our on our on our on our second
construction there's a parallel
jurisdiction there is concurrent
jurisdiction
in relation to human rights act claims
and that the virtue of that is that it
enables
the um the admin court
to weigh the necessity to try the case
in the ipt or indeed whether it's
appropriate for these keys
i think you're not dealing with my point
which is um fine that may
solve the problem in the administrative
court but it is a rather odd scheme
which um leads up to a sweep up
provision
where the
an order may be made which assigns
common law claims to the tribunal
exclusively but there's no provision
whereby claims within section 65 2a
can be assigned exclusively to the
tribunal as opposed to
excluding the jurisdiction of a court
well i'm not sure it doesn't achieve the
same the other way around because if you
go on and read b
it says you must in that situation give
a power to the tribunal
the mirror image power if you like to
send it back to the courts on the basis
that it isn't on the facts appropriate
for the ipt
or the uh the trial proceedings in the
ipt aren't appropriate to try it there
so you you achieve exactly the same
result in the end by virtue of b
it's just that you you're forced to
start in a different tribunal but it
gets sent back the other way
so in fact we'd say these provisions are
exactly consistent with
with our analysis um absolutely
consistent they show that
the parliament was prepared to
contemplate both
concurrent jurisdiction in relation to
these other cases that may be subject
of the order but was absolutely
concerned that if there was exclusive
jurisdiction given to the ipt
that it should be open to the claimant
to say look i don't want it
tried here for these reasons to do with
article six or that it's a
in substance not really covered by the
ipt's jurisdiction
uh and enable the ipt to send it back to
the courts
as more appropriately to be tried in the
course the end result seems to us to be
exactly the same with respect
thank you yeah um
uh we haven't um done justice i'm afraid
to lord justice dyson yet by completing
his
um having a look at his judgment
back at page 15 57
in appendix one part one
just just then to take it rather more
more quickly um uh
at 46 we got distracted by the ouster
point of 46
and whether that's a real point or not
um uh
he at 47 accepted the submission they
were all part of the same legislative
scheme
uh 48 he makes the the point that that
is
that that um we've discussed about the
fact that there are
uh bespoke uh rules um
in the ipt um for section seven
uh claims whereas parliament didn't make
such rules for the high court
uh as of the second of october
and at 52
he says i accept the draft and well
understood the difference between a
court and tribunal but in view of the
fact the ipt is a tribunal
it's not surprising that section 65 2a
provides the ipt is the only tribunal
for which section 7 proceedings may be
brought it would be odd
to designate the ipc as the only
appropriate court or tribunal because
it's not a court
we disagree with respect with that
analysis for reasons i'll explain
in the context of seven minor court is
different from a tribunal
um and he also at the end of 57
said in considering whether the ipt is a
satisfactory tribunal to determine
issues that are wider than those for
which we've
required it to be established the
composition of the tribunal
should not be overlooked
uh the lords you will be
pleased or not to hear that i've tried
to reduce our case to two pages
and and summarize our submissions
because
skeleton the the case is is long
and there have been other arguments put
into the phrase since we put our case in
so i hope this assists and i just wanted
to go through this now
this is your paper is it it's the two
two pages
yes paragraphs one to ten
[Applause]
it's it's uh as it were our argument in
a nutshell in a series of numbered
paragraphs
um i'm sorry um first of all
we dispute that the natural meaning of
the word tribunal
in section 65 2a is court or tribunal
that's the premise from which the
respondent's argument proceeds
we say that in statutes dealing with the
jurisdiction of quote courts and
tribunals these two words appear
to have following meanings a tribunal
when referred to by parliament is a body
with judicial functions but is
specially constituted variably by
statute although it may be by
prerogative
it may consist of a judge or a court
or others but it lacks the normal
general jurisdiction of the court
tribunal is therefore distinct from a
court which means a court with general
jurisdiction and the other examples
given by the respondent
were the statutory formulation only
appropriate tribunal or appropriate
tribunal
appears seem to ask to be consistent
with that distinction from that analysis
nor read in this particular context can
tribunal in reaper section 65
2a have the extended meaning intended
for by the respondent
this is because reaper is cross
referring
to hra section seven one a and two
in hra seven two an appropriate court is
a different animal from an appropriate
tribunal they are distinct statutory
concepts
the same surely should be true when the
hra concept of the
appropriate tribunal is uh incorporated
by reference into reaper
is that is that right i mean if you look
at section 7
2 it says
of the human rights act it says in
subsection 1a
appropriate court or tribunal means such
court or tribunal as may be determined
in accordance with the rules
and so if a rule says that um
this is the appropriate tribunal that
means that this is the appropriate court
or tribunal doesn't it
[Applause]
well but um
the is not the more obvious reading of
that is uh the
the the emphasis um
uh on the is on the word determination
that what the rules determine
is whether that particular judicial body
be it a court or a tribunal is the
appropriate one
i mean the rules the rules made could
say
um in terms that there is a
concurrent jurisdiction the boat both a
particular tribunal
is the appropriate tribunal but
uh the high court is also an appropriate
um
forum to bring the claim also has
jurisdiction
the word tribunal isn't defined in human
rights
um of course the
rules could say
um we accept this
this particular judicial body whether
it's a court or a tribunal on our
definition
is the appropriate court and tribunal
you could say
don't be mistaken there's no
jurisdiction anywhere else this is
exclusive jurisdiction it's very
straightforward to say that
just as parliament could say that and
could have said that in reaper
um maybe i'm misunderstanding lord's
point
but all we were saying here is that
um this the when the words appropriate
tribunal lifted into
uh hra section 2a
they are lifted into it as the distinct
animal
as the different animal to the
appropriate core that's identified in
section 71a
i mean if you had a provision which said
for the purpose of section seven
subsection two if you like we here and i
designate
this court or alternatively we have our
this tribunal
wouldn't that mean that that was the
appropriate court or tribunal
and no one else
by definition because that's what
section 7 is about
section 7 is the conferring part you
have to
bring yourself within section 7 to
to know where you can sue and all you
need for the purposes of
section seven is something which says we
designate or determine the following
x for that purpose which is
actually what um section 65 2a is doing
it
almost verbatim well yes except the
problem is you've also got
you've got 711 as well so you've got
under the two
under two different statue regimes
um the state looking two different ways
on the one hand saying you can bring it
in a court
in any court and on the other hand
saying
you can bring it in this tribunal so it
isn't just it isn't just
with respect to straightforward as that
and um
we would be rather i mean obviously
consistent with our case we'd be rather
worried about a reading of
subsection two that says if your
particular rule
just designates a tribunal as
appropriate
the inevitable necessary consequence of
that is that the jurisdiction of the
court is lost
the apparent jurisdiction of the court
given under rule 711.
well one of the exercises the minister
has to go through
under section 7 subsection 11 is
consider the
the remedies relief or remedies and the
grounds
on which the tribunal can act and that
suggests that
as it were of compatibility with the
kind of reliefs that the
uh the human rights act would be
contemplating yes would that not be
right it's not much good if the
tribunals
not actually can do except make some
kind of declaration but not grant the
reliefs
which would be appropriate for the right
that has been infringed yes
well that's certainly true or or
its jurisdiction restricted in some
other way it was simply allowed to make
awards in relation to some kind of
benefit or whatever else it would be
yes absolutely so really one has to read
the whole of section seven to follow
through
what is being talked about is not just
designating the tribunal but it's got to
be one
which is equipped with remedies and can
can examine grounds
and um i'm not at the moment clear
whether it's
talking about tribunals already existing
at the date of the act i imagine it's
not so restricted
so that you you would say i suppose i
would accept would you that it could
cover
uh the the tribunal we're talking about
although yes this is
the subject of later legislation yes
although
although here the designation was by
privately by primary legislation
yes just wasn't done under the hra it
was done by parliament
the identification of the ipt as an
appropriate tribunal
but rules still have to be made yes
under the hra yes yes
um do they have to be made under the hra
or can they be made
under some other um provision i think
they can
absolutely seven nine a in relation to a
bigger pardon
um
yes it could be for the purposes of this
section or rules of course which
suggests that you can do it under
other provisions
yes if well
it has to be for the purposes of this
section though it has to be
it has to be for the purposes of the hra
i mean the
the the the designation of the um of the
ipt as an appropriate tribunal
is is not done by by by rules
it's done by by sub by section 65 itself
by primary legislation um
i can see my lord mance's point i'm
worried that i haven't responded
there is a literal reading of that that
works that way but it's just not one
that
that seems to us uh
is is appropriate given the context that
the
the the exercise of allocating
jurisdiction is a very
um sensitive one it's a very complex one
and um we would be rather worried about
any suggestion that you as it were
automatically produce the results but
by referring one way or another to a
quarter or tribunal
um that covers both possibilities
because then equally you could say why
doesn't 7-11
mean that there's no tribunal with
jurisdiction
but why doesn't any court in 7-eleven
under the rules of the supreme court
mean any court or tribunal
it seems to as they are distinct
concepts and you must target the
allocation
to either a court or a tribunal
or to one of them to the exclusion to
the exclusion of the other
um just in passing as far as the rules
are concerned section 69
is supervision in reaper which deals
with the tribunal's
rules yes for making rules for the ipt
yes
but that's a different thing that's a
completely different thing
to making rules under the hra picking
out a particular court or tribunal as
one with jurisdiction over these claims
69 in reaper is a straightforward
rule-making procedure for the
tribunal itself
this is uh i think as as justice has put
it this this is equipped when you do it
under the hra it's a question of some
constitutional significance which
court or tribunal do you give power to
to decide human right the complaints of
human rights act violent human rights
violations
um i mean i think 69 1a
scotch is your first construction
doesn't it first contract which i don't
think
well i was i was told many years ago
when i was a pupil by george carman no
less the best way to run a case was to
have three points to give the
first one away before the k at the start
of the case to group the second one away
in the course of the case
therefore that proves that my third
point is the right one
so i'm following i'm following that
injunction
so which are we left with
we're left with of the constructions
we're left with two and three
oh we've still got two in play i would
definitely got two in play i was so
tough
i always thought the best way was to
persuade the court there's a fourth
there is a force they
we leave that right until the end um
paragraph three um we just dealt with
which is the
the incorporation of the statutory
concept
on this basis this paragraph for reaper
says nothing about the general
jurisdiction of reports under cpr711
that remains intact
then we say well what about the word
only which the respondent concentrates
on
um it doesn't seem to as that should be
read to give the following words
appropriate tribunal the unnatural
meaning or what we say is the unnatural
meaning for which the respondent
contends
if parliament intended such a meaning it
surely would have said so in terms
rather than in such an obscure and
uncertain fashion
there'd be nothing odd in saying the
tribunal is to be the only appropriate
court or tribunal
etc and note that in section 65
tribunal with a capital t is the ipt
so you could perfectly easily make clear
that
uh it's the only uh appropriate
uh court or tribunal just by spelling it
out like that doesn't seem to us there's
anything odd in it at all
and as we've said the effect of the
respondents construction is to bar the
supervisory jurisdiction of the courts
and therefore if
only is to be brought in and appropriate
tribunal is to be read
those three words as barring the
supervisory jurisdiction of the court
that would be wrong in principle you
need much clearer words than that
to produce such an adverse result from
my client
then the point that we haven't really
got to yet but seems to us a very
important one the respondents
construction requires
all section 71a claims falling within
subsection 3 of section 65 all of them
if it's to be consistent to be brought
in the ipt
exclusively with its restrictions on the
normal fair trial guarantees
the justification for this restrictive
regime is
apparently national security but many of
the section 71a
claims which might be brought under
subsection three c and d
will simply not involve any
considerations of national security at
all
they may be routine privacy or
confidentiality complaints
against defendants other than the
intelligence services including most
obviously the police
so we say this is a fatal flaw in the
respondent's argument and i wonder
whether i might
make good this point as it were out of
turn it might be the efficient way
to do it and just look now while we're
concentrating on it
at c and d in subsection 65.
um subsection
c is about section
65 4 of the act which is in part
3. so we're looking at section 65
3c 3b thank you please see i beg your
pardon
we're now down below the list of cases
involving the intelligence services
and these are remember cases that on the
respondus case have to be brought in the
ipt
for national security reasons now 55
4 is in part three
uh and uh part three deals with the
uh with encrypted information and if in
effect says look if a public official
has encrypted information and knows of
the person who has the key
that can turn it into readable
information you can go
to a judge to a certain judge and get an
order
requiring the person with the key
to give you the key so that you can turn
the encrypted information
into readable information and that is
called a section
49 order if one just turns
back to 233
you get that principle being set out in
the section headed notices requiring
disclosure
and the obviously the the important one
is one a
just just give an example of when would
this arise
um well let me do it by reference to the
wording of the statutes probably the
best way
this section applies where any protected
information has come into the possession
of any person
by means of the exercise of a statutory
power to seize detain inspect search
or otherwise to interfere with documents
or other property
or is likely to do so so it could be the
police let's just say it's the police
and when they come into
possession of material that's encrypted
if you turn over the page to subsection
two with
uh any person with the appropriate
permission under schedule
two believes on reasonable ground uh he
protects information is in the
possession of any person
um uh then uh
you can go and get a notice under
subsection
four perhaps we just look at schedule
two because it's important
um it is a bit of a
it's a judge it's a judge
uh scheduled to his page 294
a person's having the appropriate
permission
in england and wales it's a circuit
judge or a circuit judge in scotland a
sheriff
in northern ireland county court judge
so that's the person empowered
and the test that person applies under
subsection two
is um are there reasonably grounds for
believing
that x some other person has the key
and that it's the test for the
imposition of a disclosure requirement
in relation to protected information is
met
that it's necessary on grounds specified
in subsection
three or for securing the effective
exercise or proper performance of any
public authority any statute of power
statute duty so pretty wide
three a disclosure requirement in
respect of any protected information is
necessary and grounds falling within
this subsection
if it's necessary note not just in the
interest of national security but for
the purpose of preventing or detecting
any
crime at all so again very wide and even
in the interest of the economic
well-being of the united kingdom
you can then get a notice under 49.4
imposing the disclosure requirement in
respect of any protected information and
that gives the recipient of the notice
that information you'd expect them to
get about why they're being asked
or compelled to make the disclosure
um so
uh 50 over the page uh the effect of a
notice imposing the disclosure
requirement
subject to the following provisions of
this section the effect of a section 49
notice
uh is that the person that um
proposing a disclosure requirement in
respect of a protected information on a
person who is in possession of the
relevant side
both the protected information the means
of obtaining access to the information
that's the key
and disclosing it in intelligent form is
that he shall be entitled to use
any key in his possession to obtain
access
to the information or put it into an
intelligible form so supposing this
is the the technical expert in the
financial house or the bank or wherever
the information is encrypted
you target the order of the person who
can technically
turn it into readable information and
that person
b is then required to um
to turn it into an intelligible form
that's the effect of the notice
55 which is the section referred to
in subsection c is at page 244
and this is called the safeguarding duty
and as you'd expect parliament
brings into this regime for
um opening up encrypted information
general duties on specified people
and do please look at the list in
subsection one
any government minister every chief of
police
director general soka director general
of the scottish crime drug enforcement
agency
commissioners for hmrc
and sweep up every person whose officers
or employees include duties
persons with duties that involve the
giving of section 49
notices anyone who's acquired
the information in the way referred to
in section 49
could include obviously as i say a
police officer subsection two then
puts into place a series of safeguards
for the operation of this regime
as you'd expect and again the main one
is 2a
that any key disclosed in pursuance of a
section 49
notice is obtained for obtaining access
to or putting into an intelligible form
only protected information in relation
to which the power to give such a notice
was exercised
so you can't use the key to roam around
all the other encrypted information
of the bank or the finance house or the
private individual who's encrypted it
and if you read down the list you can
see it's got all the other safeguards
you'd expect you've got to keep this
key safe and so on so forth then we come
to 55
4 over the page which is the subsection
referred to in
c subject subsection 5 where any
relevant person incurs
any loss or damage and consequence of
any breach by a person to whom this
section applies of the duty imposed on
him by subsection two
or any contravention by any person
whatsoever whatever arrangement made in
pursuance of that subsection
in relation to persons under the control
of the person
to whom this section applies the breach
or controver
contravention shall be actionable
against the person to whom this section
applies
at the suit or instance of the relevant
person
so if to take an example under 4b
the police officer who holds the key
loses it and you suffer loss as a result
or uses information and you suffer loss
or damage as a result
you can bring a claim for loss or damage
against any of the 55
one people the minister the chief of
police
so on and so forth
five a person is a relevant person
person for the purposes of subsection
four if he's person who's made a
disclosure
or a person who's protected information
has been disclosed
all well and good but i i hope your
lordship to getting the point this
doesn't have to be anything to do with
national security
or the intelligence services it could be
straightforward police investigation of
crime
where there is some lack of safeguarding
procedure that causes you
financial loss because you haven't taken
care
over the use of the key or you've abused
the use of the key
and the question arises on c therefore
is why can't you bring that claim in the
court
why does the respondent say parliament
intended you to have to bring that claim
into court
if you frame it as a section 71a claim
sorry what sort of claim would it be if
you brought it in court
uh if you if you brought in the court it
would be a it would be a damages claim
um what's the cause of action breach of
statutory duty
the breach of the duty under um
subsection one
subsection 55.
but it might quite often i mean you say
sometimes it might be
relatively mundane um but it might be
under section 50
sorry 49 3 um
whether it be national security or
interest or
interest of the economic well-being of
the united kingdom and it might be
that the misuse was in fact um um
highly controversial it suggested that
this was actually
within the scope of of the original
authorization
it might have been misused for some
purposes which was also a national
security
purpose even though it wasn't originally
authorized and there might be very
sensitive matters
i agree i agree with that but the
problem is on the respondent's case it's
an all or nothing case
if the respondent is right all
actions all actionable claims have to be
brought in the ipt
even if you frame them as some uh
as privacy claims so let's say the key
is used
by the public official to read very
private information of yours
encrypted private information that would
generally
genuinely give you an article eight
complaint
you could frame that as a human rights
act claim and probably would want to
frame it as a human rights act claim
um but you'd be forced to bring it on
friend's case
in the ipt and the question is why
none of the justification for the safe
procedural regime that operates in the
ipt would apply in that case
there would be nothing of national
security significance it could be a
police constable
learning about your private life that
may be your complaint
against the state um
and uh it doesn't seem uh
to us that you can come up with any sort
of justification for forcing that sort
of claim
into the restrictive procedures of the
ipt
why shouldn't there be full fair trial
guarantees in that sort of case why
shouldn't a court deal with it
we can see no reason we can simply see
no reason
once the national security concern is
absent
from the case and the the the classes of
um
claim are they limited at all by section
say subsection four
uh bear with me
no that deals with complaints that's a
battery
so that only applies to some little d
does it yes no
no that that that applies to b b yeah
the the the it's a term of art
complaints here
in this act it covers these statutory
complaints about investigatory conduct
and the effect
i see the effect of falling within
subsection three
is that that brings within section
subsection two d is that right
no it begins it creates you with it
enforce it
subsection 2d is not yet in false
that's what i think i've picked up from
the respondents
yes the 2d is not yet enforced that's
right
but i'm not concerned with 2d in this
submissions 2a
red with three that i'm concerned
about yeah no
d is b isn't in false
but the same point can be made about 3d
as well we're now a long way from
intelligence services or national
security
and this is um
this is a bit of a this is a complicated
this is this is
a complicated uh statutory
route to travel but i'll try and track
it by way of an example if i may
what's covered under d are proceedings
uh relating to taking place in any
challengeable circumstances of any
conduct falling within
five so you go to five
and you see that um subject to
subsection six
challengeable conduct um is conduct
whenever it occurred which is
yes a conduct buyer on behalf of the
intelligence services
but also to take an example c
conduct to which chapter two of part one
applies
a chapter two of part one deals with
the acquisition and disclosure of
communications data
it's not the interception of the
communication
it's dealt with in part one and the
secretary of state must give a warrant
for that
this is the surrounding data to
communications
so the police can ask as i understand it
the internet service provider was an
email
sent by the suspect to this email
address
on such an exact date data surrounding
the communication
that's held by a third person
it's also very commonly mobile phone
calls police often go to
the suspect's mobile phone company
x had a road accident at this time was
he making a call
yes exactly um
and burglary carried out at such a time
was the burglar as
apprehended in contact with anybody else
the preceding half-hour
yes yeah um
and then d are the conduct to which part
two applies the
the other conductor which part two
applies is surveillance
which is my lords may know is either
directed or intrusive surveillance
directed surveillance
doesn't look into your home or your car
intrusive surveillance does and there's
a stricter authorization regime for that
but directed surveillance can be
following you down the street
or looking looking at what you're doing
in a hotel room or something provided
it's not your home or your car it's
directed surveillance
so that's subject to subsection six
purposes only of subsection three
nothing mentioned in d
or f of subsection five she'll be
treated as falling within that
subsection
unless it's conduct on behalf of a
person holding any office or rank or
position
with right so take
d as an example the surveillance example
it would have to be conduct on behalf of
for example
um a person holding an official rank
within a police force
fine we're still within our standard
sort of case
police performing directed surveillance
and challengeable circumstances are
dealt with at seven
for the purposes of this section conduct
takes place in challengeable
circumstances if it takes
place with the authority or reported
authority
of anything falling within subsection
eight
and if you look down to eight that
includes under b
a standard authorization or notice for
the acquisition of
communications data or an authorization
this is c
under part two of this act so that's a
standard authorization
allowing directive or intrusive
surveillance
okay so this could the complaint the
human rights act claim you frame here
could be against the police it doesn't
have to be against the intelligence
services
so to take rather an extreme example
supposing you are
having an affair with your mistress in a
hotel room and your complaint is
the police officer got authority to
conduct directed surveillance
and learned about all your private life
that went on in the hotel room because
he listened into it
and that there was absolutely no
justification under article 8
2 for that intrusion into your privacy
you weren't doing a drug deal in there
you weren't
conspiring to commit a crime you could
bring
your human rights act in that way
and if milan friend is right you'd be
forced to bring it in the ipt
which is the point at which you realize
how absurd his construction is
and how hard one to fight to avoid it
there is no reason whatsoever why a
claim like that against the police
about interference with your article 8
rights through some police directed
surveillance or finding out what phone
calls you made
um should be brought in the ipt should
have to be brought in the ipt
where as we know you don't you're lucky
to get disclosure of the other side's
case
there's no cross-examination of
witnesses i mean one would have thought
in that sort of case
you'd want to put the police officers in
the witness box and cross-examine them
as to why they gave authority for the
surveillance
but there's no issue of national
security well they might presumably give
some
excuse which suggested maybe under
misapprehension that there was some
issue of national security
i mean one assumes they weren't doing a
sort of uh
a prurient exercise for nothing
absolutely much more likely but the
complaint would be that the officer of
the
the pc or the dc or the ds applying for
authority was investigating a drugs case
or something and saying
you know that you were going into the
hotel room to do a drug deal
or to do some other uh act which was
part of a criminal conspiracy
that would be a much likelier scenario
if your complaint was just against the
police
in relation to the investigation of
crime
um but i mean you you think it's more
obvious
you think it's it's obvious is it that
that's much better done by judicial
review
uh with discovery and cross-examination
all these things that you don't usually
have in judicial review but is that how
you would rather it was done
well uh you don't the
all that seven uh rule seven eleven it
says is that any court has juris
jurisdiction over that complaint where
would you where would you want this
litigated
well if you might if it was a small
claim you might want a counter court
judge to look at it why not
a circuit judge in the crown court would
be looking at this stuff all the time
complaints about inappropriate
surveillance directed surveillance that
wasn't properly authorized
every time somebody makes an application
under section 78 of pace
in relation to some surveillance
evidence on the basis that
it was wrongly obtained it's a standard
it's a standard sort of investigation
for us
i mean this isn't one of the critical
questions yes or no was it authorized
isn't this part of the don't ask no
that's that no it isn't no no
because it would be authorized by it by
a senior but i mean
we haven't looked back at sections i
think it's 20 28 29
but the regime the lord may recall
for uh authorizing surveillance
directed surveillance actually allows
the chief officer of police to do
the chief officer of that police force
to do it um
and the same is true of intrusive
surveillance and in fact you can
delegate delegate down so we're not
talking here about
um authority uh from the intelligence
services we're talking about authority
from more senior police officers
well i wonder whether you can work
through section 67 to see how this all
could follow and follow through in
practice because
as it were a catalogue in section 67 if
the exercises the
tribunal goes through in performing its
function
and um you can see particularly
subsection three
where they consider a complaint made
under 52b
there's various things that they have to
do
yes but that wouldn't be the case here
because it would be a 2a claim
you frame it as a as a section 71 a
complaint well we've got 2a referred to
in subsection 2.
i'm so sorry subsection two yes the the
the the ipt
has to apply judicial review principles
in that situation
can it go on in an a case to deal with
the things that are contemplated in
subsection three which is to see
investigate amongst other things the
authority if any
for the conduct falling within section
5 which they find has been engaged
uh i think that area of its
of its uh how it tackles the
fact-finding in the case
is is is it's open to them to do that to
look at the facts
and the assessment under the human
under the convention in any way it wants
subject to the things that it can't do
and the things that it is constrained in
relation to
um and so in the act uh
what you get for example in subsection
seven
uh is it can what it can award any uh
compensation or make any order um
but uh subsection eight it can't be
appealed or judicially reviewed well
immediately then
you can see the absurdity of this so
my man in the hotel room is unhappy
about the adjudication of the ipt on his
article 8 claim which has been forced
into the ict as we understand it
on the respondent's plane and that's the
end of it that there's financing
why should there be finality in that
case if there's an error of law
if or if my
hypothetical complainant wants to appeal
or judicially review
then in section 68 you get the
restrictions on the procedure
um 68 1 i think was the point i was on
with my lord lord
lord hope subject to any rules made
under 69 the tribunal should be entitled
to determine their own procedure
in relation to any proceedings before or
may to them so there is a measure of
flexibility
as to procedure but
subsection four
subject to any any rules for the ipt
um
[Applause]
all you can say at the determination of
the claims
uh it is uh either they've made a
determination in favor
of the complainant or no determination
has
been made in his favor now there are no
rules mitigating the effect of
4b so if my man in the hotel room loses
in front of the ipt
he's just told that he's just told
you've lost your accolade
plane don't give any reason why
why is it necessary to impose that sort
of restriction on the claim of that sort
and then you get it six and seven the
duty to disclose
material on crown officials 69 the power
to make
rules uh the shopping list of things at
subsection
two that the rules may cover
um
uh and the uh imperative
um at 69.6
the the this is respected in the rules
as we've seen
um that um
uh 6b uh needs to clear the information
is not disclosed to an extent or a
manner that is contrary to the public
interest and so on and so forth so
that's the
protection for the uh not confirmed not
deny
policy the rules must respect that and
they do
um but but you don't really need to get
far
further than the no reasons if you lose
and no appeal or judicial
review to see how odd the outcome is in
the in the example that i've given
um it is or would be a fairly standard
sort of privacy complaint against
a state agency against the police uh
about a
wrongful intrusion into your private
information what you were doing in the
hotel room
no national security implications at all
yet
that would still fall under 65 2a i mean
this is actually an operating system yes
and presumably that's how it's been
working
um well it actually has there's a case
called
cv versus police which is in the bundle
um which we perhaps have a look at after
lunch it's an interesting it's an
interesting case
it was a police officer who was claiming
an injury award under the police pension
scheme
and the police authority that would be
liable to pay it did what a lot of
defendants do in personal injury claims
which is to see whether he was doing the
gardening
whether he was as badly injured as he
claimed to be
by looking at him on his own premises in
his back garden
and he brought his claim in the tribunal
he complained about that
surveillance for those purposes and the
tribunal said
i'm paraphrasing well it isn't really
the sort of case that we should have
jurisdiction over
it's not to do with the core functions
under reaper of investigatory powers
um and they obviously saw a very big
problem
in the width of the act i mean there are
a number of respects
with respect to parliament in which this
really hasn't
necessarily been thought through at its
outer edges
and what does the tribunal do i think
there's some jurisdiction
the decline jurisdiction which number is
the in the
authorities is that maybe six
[Applause]
is
what they said is i mean whether this
was right or not is another matter
what they said is
look this really isn't directed
surveillance within the
the meaning of of reaper um
this is something else you're you're
you're
spying on and you're looking at him for
your own purposes
of the police authority because you
don't want to pay the full award
um but whether that's correct or not i
don't want one
i've got my doubts i mean i just think
it was a pragmatic decision
that it wasn't really the sort of thing
that the act had in mind
until two
hmm
you